Challenge 8: Measuring the impact
---------------------------------

“Change has never happened this fast before, and it will never be this
slow again” [1]_. The introduction of new Artificial Intelligence (IA)
technologies in the society and, in particular, in the Public
Administration, brings with it the natural desire to measure and
understand its social impacts, risks and opportunities.

Currently it is essential to measure the impact of public policies, both
in the viewpoint of the user, namely the citizen, and of the PA.
Regarding the first point, it is necessary to think in terms of
improving the quality of people’s life, but also of the conditions to
use what is offered to them.

The measurement of the impact in using Artificial Intelligence solutions
in the PA contemplates the use of qualitative and quantitative
indicators. For example, the methods for measuring *customer
satisfaction* (e.g. social impact, well-being of citizens, accessibility
and usability of the tools) or related to the optimization of
organizational processes in terms of efficiency and effectiveness.

Many quantitative models subdivide workers by their employment and try
to hypothesize which professions will be replaced by technologies, in
other words these models base their operation by considering jobs and
employment as a unit of analysis. However, technology often does not
completely replace a professional figure but replaces only some specific
activities. Workers who previously held a particular task are therefore
addressed and reassigned to complementary activities that use the new
technologies. Over time, technology leads to a complete rethinking of
organizational processes and objectives.

Given the complexity of the phenomenon to be analysed, the impact must
be measured necessarily taking into account a multidisciplinary
approach, which allows to define the impact also from an
anthropological, psychological and sociological point of view, as well
as from a technological and econometric point of view.

For this reason, it is necessary to identify new *sets* of indicators
that can better adopt this multidisciplinary approach, in synergy with
the indicators existing today.

In any case, it is necessary to keep in mind that the methods adopted to
measure the impact can promote a better understanding of the services by
the users and encourage the transition to new governance [2]_ models.

Mapping needs and defining impact objectives with all the actors
involved, collecting real-time information on how all the nodes of a
network interact, is the first essential step in understanding and
defining correct policy assessments.

Unfortunately, these assessments are not updated so frequently as they
should, due to financial limitations or unavailability of competent
assessors. As policy assessment is commonly based on data, AI could
enable a faster and more accurate analysis.

A greater balance in the analysis of opportunities and risks could be an
important factor to increase awareness of the real impact [3]_ that AI
​​can have in our daily lives [4]_.

Finally, measuring the impact of these technologies is useful in terms
of designing and developing AI, in order to guarantee reliability and
transparency as well as to reduce the risk of errors, also as regards
the Public Administration [5]_. Analysing its operation allows us to
determine valid models for an ethical and responsible use of AI.

Measurement tools must be strict to determine the effective social
impacts of AI ​​and to define how these technologies can actually
influence our lives.
   
.. rubric:: Footnotes

.. [1]
   Justin Trudeau, Canadian premier, in his speech at the World Economic
   Forum Annual Meeting 2018

   `https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2018/01/pm-keynote-remarks-for-world-economic-forum-2018 <https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2018/01/pm-keynote-remarks-for-world-economic-forum-2018>`__
   (Consulted in February 2018).

.. [2]
   *See* Challenge 6 “Accompanying the transformation”.

.. [3]
   European Commission - DG for Research and Innovation, Directorate A -
   Policy Development and Coordination, Unit A.6 - Open Data, Policy and
   Science Cloud; “\ *Vision and Trends of Social Innovation for
   Europe*\ ”, 2017.

.. [4]
   A case that can be taken into consideration comes from the UK, where
   it has been tried to measure the impact of AI in people’s lives
   monitoring the variation in the sleeping hours of a population sample
   (`https://www.pwc.co.uk/economic-services/assets/ai-uk-report-v2.pdf <https://www.pwc.co.uk/economic-services/assets/ai-uk-report-v2.pdf>`__).

.. [5]
   Recent research on neural networks have experimented the use of AI
   for policy assessment (in some cases it has been discovered how
   administrative decentralization and governmental federalism have
   increased fiscal inequalities in local governments - *See* paper
   Warner, M. E. and J.E. Pratt (2005) Spatial diversity in local
   government revenue effort under decentralization: a neural-network
   approach Environment and Planning C: Government and Policy 23(5)
   657-677).
