Challenge 3: Skills
-------------------

While all of us in everyday life are beginning to come across Artificial
Intelligence tools (e.g. chatbots, virtual assistants and automated
traffic calculation and management systems), there is a different
familiarity in its use in professional contexts or in Public
Administration. [1]_

The employment market is undergoing a profound transformation and in the
short term we will see an evolution in professions: new ones will be
born while those existing will be extensively modified with the
introduction of new processes and methodologies [2]_.

It will be necessary to ensure that people are able to design and
develop AI systems and applications, also in direct and deep
collaboration with research and major technology operators.

In the same way, it will be of fundamental importance to cultivate and
develop the skills necessary for the interaction between human beings
and AI, which will become increasingly complex by virtue of the
possibility of touching the language, gestures, body, emotions and many
other expressive dimensions of mankind [3]_.

The consolidation of skills is therefore crucial to be aligned with the
great technological and socio-economic changes that the world is about
to face, in order to be able to prepare young generations, but also
adults, to seize future challenges.

How are these skills being enabled? There are several areas on which to
act: that, more specifically, of training public and private workers, on
both the demand as well as the supply side, the more general, but not
less important, aspect of the literacy of everyone in order to fully
exploit digital services, and the most advanced aspect of specialised
and trans-disciplinary training.

In the second area, that of literacy, it is important to help people
understand what Artificial Intelligence is and what benefits it can
actually make, in order to enable them to make the best use of the
services offered, inculcating a positive and optimistic approach in the
collective imagination avoiding rejection of the unknown [4]_.
Furthermore, since the relationship with AI largely takes place through
natural interfaces - such as speech, written text and gestures - it is
necessary to “educate” citizens with the aim of reducing the access gap
to such technologies.

This latter point, of course, primarily involves the school system,
which must take into account the changes described in order to make the
training of citizens and workers of the future effective. Currently, and
probably still for many years, Artificial Intelligence will be able to
perform rather simple tasks. Already today, however, it is important
that the school system and the university system enable students for the
future in which they will live as adults, therefore developing problem
solving and information analysis and synthesis skills, as well as those
of formulation of independent opinions, creativity, empathic interaction
and refined use of one’s sensory and psychomotor capacities, areas in
which it will be difficult for machines to compete with human beings.

It clearly emerges that knowledge models based mainly on the
memorisation of notions and information that have not been analysed or
briefly elaborated and organised, and teaching methods that prioritise
the quantity of knowledge acquired rather than the critical education of
the student, are destined to progressively lose importance.

Regarding the third area, that of specialist and trans-disciplinary
training for public and private professionals who intend to work in the
AI sector, it is important to prioritise training in multidisciplinary
contexts, providing them with the skills that are fundamental to fully
understand the meaning of the solutions that will be developed from time
to time and which will be destined to have an impact on people’s lives.

At the moment, in addition to technical experts in specific disciplines
such as machine learning and data science, of fundamental importance
will be transversal figures such as psychologists, anthropologists,
sociologists and humanists in general, able to improve the interaction
between AI and its users, fully understand how the latter can be
inserted in the various contexts of everyday life, improving its
conditions, and establish meaningful interconnections between
disciplines, so as to be able to create new generations of designers who
are able to devise systems of technological excellence that are also
able to generate meaning and a tangible increase in economic, cultural,
social and psychological well-being.

There is currently a disproportion between the demand for specialist
figures in the fields of advanced technologies and the availability of
adequate skills, and therefore the private sector is willing to pay very
high salaries in order to compete in the innovation market with the
contribution of the best talent. A challenge to PA will retain
researchers and professionals, albeit not being able to compete with the
salary levels offered by the private sector [5]_. The skills in
administrations are in fact a determining factor for the balanced
introduction of new technologies, for which it is important that the
administrations are not dependent on suppliers.

Therefore, with a view to developing skills, permanent and specialist
training mechanisms will be required at all levels. This approach shifts
the focus of the debate from the replacement of the workforce to the
improvement of workers’ skills and, consequently, the quality of
services and solutions offered by a workforce adequately trained on AI
issues.

From a training point of view, regardless of the educational or
professional level, the integration of AI in learning programmes can
contribute to increasing human abilities, supporting decision making and
facilitating the possibility of engaging in more specialised or more
creative activities.

One of the objectives of Artificial Intelligence applied to cognitive
systems is precisely that of increasing human abilities.

From this point of view, Public Administration must become an
“innovation gym”: just as, thanks to the Industry Plan 4.0 [6]_,
companies know they have to implement resources and skills to keep up
with the market, also PA, if it does not want to lose in capability,
competitiveness and attractiveness, will have to envisage a plan to
expand the skills of public employees and innovate digital services.
   
.. rubric:: Footnotes

.. [1]
   Hila Mehr, *Artificial Intelligence for Citizen Services and
   Government*, HARVARD Kennedy School - ASH Center for Democratic
   Governance and Innovation (2017)

.. [2]
   Carl Benedikt Frey, Michael Osborne, *The Future of Employment: how
   susceptible are jobs to computerisation?*, The Oxford Martin
   Programme on Technology and Employment (2013); Martin Ford, *Il
   futuro senza lavoro. Accelerazione tecnologica e macchine
   intelligenti. Come prepararsi alla rivoluzione economica in arrivo*,
   Il Saggiatore (2017); Aaron Smith, Janna Anderson, *AI, Robotics, and
   the Future of Jobs*, Pew Research Center 6 (2014).

.. [3]
   *See* Challenge 9 “The human being”.

.. [4]
   *See* Challenge 9 “The human being”.

.. [5]
   Cade Metz, *Tech Giants are paying huge salaries for scarce AI
   talent*, The New York Times, 22, 10, 2017.
   `https://www.nytimes.com/2017/10/22/technology/artificial-intelligence-experts-salaries.html <https://www.nytimes.com/2017/10/22/technology/artificial-intelligence-experts-salaries.html>`__.

.. [6]
   Introduced for the first time in September 2016 by the Ministry of
   Economic Development, the National Industry Plan 4.0 (now `Impresa
   4.0 <http://www.sviluppoeconomico.gov.it/index.php/it/per-i-media/notizie/2037096-piano-nazionale-impresa-4-0-i-risultati-del-2017-e-le-linee-guida-per-il-2018>`__)
   consists of a set of homogeneous and complementary measures able to
   facilitate investments for innovation and competitiveness, becoming a
   guide for all companies wishing to seize the opportunities linked to
   the fourth industrial revolution.

   The Plan includes concrete measures based on three main guidelines:
   (1) operate with a technological neutrality approach; (2) intervene
   with horizontal and not vertical or sectoral actions; (3) act on
   enabling factors. All the measures that have proved effective have
   been strengthened and addressed in a 4.0 approach and, in order to
   fully respond to the emerging needs, new ones have been envisaged
   (*See*
   `http://www.sviluppoeconomico.gov.it/index.php/it/industria40 <http://www.sviluppoeconomico.gov.it/index.php/it/industria40>`__).
